`brainglobe-atlasapi` V3 draft blog (#535)
brainglobe/brainglobe.github.io: docs/source/blog/brainglobe-atlasapi-v3-release.md

---
blogpost: true
date: Aug 7, 2026
author: Igor Tatarnikov
location: London, England
category: brainglobe
language: English
---

> # `brainglobe-atlasapi` V3 is Here!

Reviewer: The rest of our blog titles are lowecase
```suggestion
# `brainglobe-atlasapi` V3 is here!
```

We're excited to announce the full release of `brainglobe-atlasapi` version 3. You can install it (or upgrade) with:

```bash
pip install -U brainglobe-atlasapi
```

If you followed along with the [V3 pre-release post](atlas-api-v3.md), you already know what changed under the hood. Atlases have moved from single monolithic archives on [GIN](https://gin.g-node.org/) to independently versioned components stored on AWS S3, with image data in the [OME-Zarr](https://ngff.openmicroscopy.org/) format and meshes in the [precomputed](https://github.com/google/neuroglancer/blob/576c94b08ad7609919eb42f8a93b9cf0e161df14/src/datasource/precomputed/meshes.md#multi-resolution-mesh-format) format.

## A quick recap of the new structure

An atlas is no longer a single bundle. It is a manifest that points at four kinds of independently versioned components: a template, an annotation set (labels, hemispheres, meshes, and pre-computed masks), a coordinate space, and a terminology. The layout follows the [Atlas Asset Organization](https://atlas-assets.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) from the Allen Institute.

> Components that are shared between atlases are stored once rather than duplicated per atlas. Two annotation sets over the same template, or the same terminology reused across related atlases, are uploaded a single time.

Reviewer: I found the original wording a bit confusing
```suggestion
Components that are shared between atlases are stored once rather than duplicated per atlas. Two annotation sets associated with the same template, or the same terminology reused across related atlases, are uploaded a single time.
```

```

```{image} ./images/brainglobe-atlasapi_v3_structure.png
:class: only-light
:alt: An illustration showing the remote and the local directory structures. The remote directory shows two atlases with their shared components. The total disk usage on the remote is 2.8 GB. The local directory is shown after installing the atlases. Only the necessary components are downloaded and the disk usage is 268 KB.
```

**Figure 1. The remote and local directory structures for two atlases sharing components.** The files on the remote take 2.8 GB. A local install of both atlases takes 268 KB until you ask for actual pixels or meshes.

The [pre-release post](atlas-api-v3.md) has the full detail on the format itself.

## What this means now

### Components are only fetched when requested

Instantiating an atlas fetches the manifest, the terminology, and a handful of small metadata files. Templates, annotations, hemispheres, meshes and masks are each fetched from S3 the first time they are requested, and cached locally afterwards.

> Download times now scale with what your analysis needs, not with the size of the atlas it happens to use. Visualising the hippocampal mesh for every BrainGlobe atlas fetches around 100 MB of meshes. Those atlases contain over 500 GB of images and meshes between them.

Reviewer: I found the original wording a bit strange, but not sure if this is better.
```suggestion
Download times now scale with what your analysis needs, not with the size of the atlas it happens to use. Visualising the hippocampus for every BrainGlobe atlas fetches around 100 MB of meshes rather than the 500GB that all the full atlases would take up.
```

```{image} ./images/task_figure.png
:alt: Two routes to the same result for the task "visualise the hippocampus inside the brain". The old route downloads the whole atlas as a single 7.4 GB TAR archive containing every image and mesh. The new route downloads only the requested hippocampus and root meshes, 2.3 MB. Both end at the same rendering of a green hippocampus inside a transparent brain.
```

**Figure 2. Lazy fetching of components for analysis.** To draw the hippocampus inside a transparent brain, V2 pulled a 7.4 GB archive containing every image and every mesh in the atlas. V3 fetches the two meshes the render actually uses, 2.3 MB.

### Uptime and download speed

> Atlases are now served from AWS S3 rather than from [GIN](https://gin.g-node.org/). GIN has served BrainGlobe well for years, but it is a single research-hosted service, and when it was slow or down every pipeline that needed a fresh atlas stalled. S3 is redundant and has much higher throughput, so that should stop happening. The chunked formats help here too: a download is now many small independent requests that can be fetched in parallel, instead of one long serial transfer.

Reviewer: ### 
```suggestion
Atlases are now served from AWS S3 rather than from [GIN](https://gin.g-node.org/). GIN has served BrainGlobe well for years, but it is hosted by a single research institute, and when it was slow or down every pipeline that needed a fresh atlas stalled. S3 is redundant and has much higher throughput, so that should stop happening. The chunked formats help here too: a download is now many small independent requests that can be fetched in parallel, instead of one long serial transfer.
```

### Faster iteration across atlases

> Comparing regions across atlases used to mean waiting for each atlas to download in full before you could look at anything. Now a loop over a dozen atlases costs a dozen manifest downloads plus whichever components you touch. Comparing region hierarchies never downloads a single voxel, and comparing one region's mesh downloads one mesh per atlas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comparing regions across atlases used to mean waiting for each atlas to download in full before you could look at anything. Now a loop over a many atlases costs a few manifest downloads plus whichever components you touch. Comparing region hierarchies never downloads a single voxel, and comparing one region's mesh downloads one mesh per atlas.
```

### Faster structure mask computation

In V2, `atlas.get_structure_mask("CTX")` walked the region tree, collected every descendant id, and ran `np.isin` over the entire annotation volume. This took seconds to minutes for a region with many children, every time, for every region. V3 ships masks as a pre-computed 4D array with one slice per region, so `get_structure_mask` fetches and reads a single slice. This doesn't add a significant disk space burden as the masks are highly compressible.

### Pinning an atlas version

`BrainGlobeAtlas` can now take an explicit version:

```python
from brainglobe_atlasapi import BrainGlobeAtlas

atlas = BrainGlobeAtlas("allen_mouse_25um", version="3.0")
```

> Leave it out and you get the latest release, as before. Give it and you get that specific BrainGlobe version of the atlas. A methods section can then name the version it used, and someone else can reproduce the analysis years later. Several versions of the same atlas can also sit side by side locally, which the old layout did not allow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leave it out and you get the latest release, as before. Provide it and you get that specific BrainGlobe version of the atlas. A methods section can then name the version it used, and someone else can reproduce the analysis years later. Several versions of the same atlas can also sit side by side locally, which the old format did not allow.
```

### Looking at an atlas without installing anything

Because the image data are OME-Zarr and the meshes are in the precomputed format, both are directly readable by [neuroglancer](https://github.com/google/neuroglancer). Atlases on the [atlas details page](../documentation/brainglobe-atlasapi/usage/atlas-details.md) now carry a "View in neuroglancer" badge, for example the [Allen adult mouse atlas](https://neuroglancer-demo.appspot.com/#!https://brainglobe.s3.amazonaws.com/ng_state_files/allen_mouse.json) or the [Columbia cuttlefish atlas](https://neuroglancer-demo.appspot.com/#!https://brainglobe.s3.amazonaws.com/ng_state_files/columbia_cuttlefish.json).

Being able to preview an atlas this quickly makes it much easier to decide whether it suits your data before you build an analysis pipeline around it, and to share a specific view with a collaborator or a reviewer.

### Faster releases of new atlases

> Since components are versioned separately, changing one of them no longer forces a rebuild of everything else. Fixing a typo in a region name used to mean regenerating and repackaging the whole atlas, which for a high-resolution atlas is hours of compute followed by a fresh multi-gigabyte upload. Now it means republishing a terminology file and referencing it from a new atlas manifest. The same goes for adding metadata to an atlas or one of its components, so expect considerable work here in the future!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since components are versioned separately, changing one of them no longer forces a rebuild of everything else. Fixing a typo in a region name used to mean regenerating and repackaging the whole atlas, which for a high-resolution atlas is hours of compute followed by a fresh multi-gigabyte upload. Now it means republishing a terminology file and referencing it from a new atlas manifest. The same goes for adding additional metadata to an atlas or one of its components, so expect considerable progress here in the future!
```

### Easier atlas collections

> Shared components make families of atlases much cheaper to publish. A single template with several annotation sets, or an atlas with multiple templates that share a single annotation set, is now a handful of manifests pointing at mostly the same objects, rather than several nearly identical multi-gigabyte bundles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shared components make families of atlases much cheaper to publish. A single template with several annotation sets, or an atlas with multiple templates that share a single annotation set, is now a handful of manifest files pointing at mostly the same objects, rather than several nearly identical multi-gigabyte bundles.
```
